# Thesis Project - The Effect of Dietary Intake of Cholesterol on Cholesterol Species Levels in the Human Body

4th year thesis project coded in MATLAB which modelled the levels of various cholesterol species (eg. LDL, HDL, VLDL, etc.) in the human body in response to dietary cholesterol intake. This version is old and a newer version is being worked on by another 4th year thesis student.

# Abstract
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) are two key factors that determine how susceptible an individual is to develop cardiovascular diseases. High levels of low-density lipoprotein in the body increases the risk of developing cardiovascular diseases while high levels of high-density lipoprotein reduces the risk of developing cardiovascular diseases. While there have been many drugs that have been produced that can counteract high levels of low-density lipoprotein and thus reduce the risk of CVD, they are expensive and can be incompatible with a patient due to pre-existing conditions or other medication that a patient may be taking may be using. Thus, diet has been explored as an option to reduce LDL levels in the body. Due to the resource and time cost as well as non-compliance from test subjects in clinical tests, a mathematical whole-body modelling approach can be used to better understand the impact that diet has on cholesterol levels in the body.

In this proposed model, the human body is modelled by four compartments (liver, blood, intestines and periphery) and a system of differential equations derived from mass balance is used to describe the transport and interactions of different cholesterol species in the human body (chylomicrons, very-low-density lipoprotein, low-density lipoprotein, nascent high-density lipoprotein and high-density lipoprotein). The model parameters were found through fitting to clinical data and a sensitivity analysis was performed to determine the efficacy and accuracy of the proposed model. Finally, various types of diets were investigated using the proposed model to predict the impact these diets would have on the levels of LDL and HDL in the blood.

The model was able to fit the clinical data provided, with the model fitting better to the LDL data than to the HDL data. The sensitivity analysis demonstrated that the model accurately shows which parameters have the most effect on the overall dynamics of the system and agrees with studies done on how which factors have the greatest effect on the levels of cholesterol species levels in the human body. Lastly, the model predictions with regards to the effects of different types of diets on cholesterol levels in the human body proved to be have potential and shows that with increased dietary cholesterol intake, LDL and HDL levels will both increase with LDL increasing to unhealthy levels.
Overall, the results from this thesis demonstrate that the proposed model can model the effect of diet on cholesterol species levels in the human body and agrees with clinical studies. There are still many areas that the model could be improved and these areas should be investigated to improve the model’s predictive capabilities. It has the potential to allow researchers to better understand the mechanism behind cholesterol metabolism and could be used as a way of prescribing specialized diets for patients who suffer from high levels of cholesterol and are at high risk of developing CVD.
